# xray_code
Python code with CIAO integration for analysis of Chandra X-ray images

--- Currently there is an error with CIAO's wcs_match function (used in the code to fix the astrometry) that causes a segfault when there are no matches between the source list and catalog source list. To (kind of) get by this, simply add the obsid of the problem galaxy to the skip_obsid_astrom variable AS A STRING and it should skip right over the use of the wcs_match function.


GENERAL INFO--------------
In order for this code to work you'll need to manually enter the Petrosian 50% light radius (r50) value for each galaxy - see the VARIABLES section in the code. You also have the option to add in the galaxy distances to calculate luminosities - if you do be sure to set galdist_flag to True to calculate them (see VARIABLES section). You will also need to specify the energy bands for filtering the final X-ray image and the energy bands to be used for calculating flux (see the VARIABLES section).

You should put the folder containing this code in the directory containing all the obsid folders for your observations. Then, after changing the values of r50_all_gals (and galdist and galdist_flag if you want to calculate luminosities), as well as band_check and filter_check, you should just be able to run the code and it'll work. Note that the code checks to see whether time-intensive tasks (such as chandra_repro, fluximage, wavdetect, and srcflux) have already been run by checking to see if the folder exists - and if the folder exists it won't run it again. So if you have already run the code, and want to change parameters regarding those functions and have the code redo the functions, you'll have to delete the relevant folder (in the obsid directory):
-repro_.../		-  chandra_repro  (note doing this will basically have the code restart completely from zero)
-fixastrom_nogal/	-  astrometry-related fluximage and wavdetect (used to correct the astrometry)
-analysis/		-  analysis-related fluximage and wavdetect (used to find sources for analysis) 
-flux/			-  srcflux (finding the actual fluxes from the sources)

Note that the repro/ folder will also have the flux band and filtering band in the title - e.g., if you're filtering the image at 2-7 keV and finding flux from 2-10 keV, the folder name will be "repro_2-10-band__2-7-filter". Also important - the code creates a results folder to store results in - the name varies depending on the specific band and filter, in exactly the same way as the repro folder. Before rerunning the code, you should also delete the relevant results folder generated by the first run of the code, or else things might end up messy with duplicate files and such. This can also be avoided by renaming that initial results folder e.g. to /results_old


QUIRKS/TIPS---------------
-The only thing you need to change when using the code on different galaxies is the r50_all_gals and galdist variables.
-The only thing you need to change when using the code with a different filter or flux band is the band_check and filter_check variables.
-The code only works if the galaxy of interest is at the aimpoint of the S3 chip (i.e. if it was the target of the observation).
-The astrometry won't get updated correctly if there is more than one ASOL file. This would be a fairly quick fix in the code if it were to occur, though.
-The expected background sources are only calculated for hard and soft band fluxes (2-10 and 0.5-2 keV, respectively), as those are the only bands the relevant equation is defined for. Other bands will have NaN in this column in the results folder.f
-Sometimes DS9 freezes (at least on my machine) e.g. while doing the astrometry matching. You can press the alt key to get it to unfreeze. No idea why.
-Read the entire readme file and at least the overview in the script, as they answer most questions. The code is also highly commented, so cruising through that might help you solve your issue as well.


OUTPUT--------------------
Everything of importance will go in the results folder. 
-galaxy_data.txt	-  information that only changes from galaxy to galaxy - e.g. astrometry-related information, how many good/bad sources there were
-params.txt		-  the specific values of the parameters used in the run of the code. SEE THE WARNING IN THIS FILE about changing time-intensive-task related parameters without deleting the corresponding folders.
-src_all.txt		-  all the information regarding specific sources - counts, net counts, information on source and backround apertures, etc.
-src_summary.txt	-  handpicked summary of the important information - net counts, fluxes, etc.

The regions_and_images folder  -  This one needs some extra explanation. Multiple files are included for each galaxy that had sources found in it:
-fin_psf_srcs.bg.reg	-  the background regions used for the sources. Note that when a background region intersected with a source region, the intersection was excluded from the background region in calculations.
-fin_psf_srcs.src.reg	-  the source regions used to calculate the fluxes. Note that when multiple source regions intersected, the intersection was excluded from both source regions for calculations.
	A note about these two region files - they will only work when used on the Chandra .fits file associated with that observation (such as the new_evt2.fits file) as the region file coords are in pixels.
-galaxy_region_ds9.reg	-  the galaxy region used - sources inside this region were excluded when matching found sources to catalog sources, and we only calculated fluxes for sources inside this region.
-new_evt2.fits		-  the X-ray image (filtered, cleaned, and astrometrically corrected) used to calculate fluxes
-xray_ds9_regions.reg	-  source positions with positional errors and names (in sky coordinates - use these if you want to put the sources on e.g. an HST image)



OTHER--------------------
The code follows along with the procedure regarding X-ray data in [this 2019 paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.12585) and [this 2021 paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05876). We use Dickey & Lockman maps for our galactic column densities, and we use a power-law spectral model with a photon index of 1.8. For a more in-depth explanation, see the code. There's a brief overview at the top, and the code is divided into sections - under each section is a slightly more in-depth explanation of what's happening, and then the individual comments should explain in detail what's going on.

Common issues/quirks are explained in the overview in the code.

Rerunning - if you are rerunning the code on the same galaxies with the same flux and filtering bands (but with other parameters changed) you will need to delete the relevant repro/ folder and rerun the time-intensive tasks in order to get those parameters to actually take. In general, if you change any of the parameters, best practice is to delete the repro/ folder just in case and rerun the code from scratch.

The source and background final regions (fin_psf_srcs.bg.reg and fin_psf_srcs.src.reg) will only display correctly on the Chandra image of the galaxy (new_evt2.fits), as they're in pixel coordinates and not sky coordinates. e.g. if you try to overlay those regions on an HST image in DS9, the regions won't be in the correct place.


ADDING NEW BANDS--------------------

If you want to add a new option to band_check, you'll need to ctrl+f and add an additional elif statement where it's called in the code. Additionally, you'll need to add another option to srcflux_band, which means you'll need to find the appropriate specific energy to use for the new band, which can most likely be found on the CIAO website.


